
Right about now, you can see something happening that shouldn’t be happening. China is beginning to get involved in Russia’s war on Ukraine. So. Whose side is China really on? Can we stop it from being on Russia’s side? What does China want? These are all questions which need to be asked if the object is to prevent another World War — imminently.
You can see that America is increasingly worried about China’s involvement. Yesterday, there were “intense seven hour negotiations” in which America tried to warn China from backing Russia — even though it’s suspicion is that China’s already sending military and financial aid. Russia, meanwhile, is reported to have requested everything from food for its troops to missiles from China.
It shouldn’t be too hard to see that if China supplies weapons to Russian troops — who are already in Ukraine — and the conflict escalates just one tiny step further, like an “accidental” missile explosion in NATO territory, the kind of deception that Russia’s famous for, then we are on the brink of world war. Nuclear world war.
To understand the situation the West is in, regarding China, you are going to need to put your emotions to one side. This moment calls for absolute clarity of thought. Westerners are not going to like to hear the simple facts of the matter in this case.
Whose side is China on? Let’s begin with a warning not to be naive. Of course China will say the right things diplomatically. It is — has become — very skilled at that. Part of it is cultural, and part of is wanting to maintain its place in the world. Still, China is as skilled in its own kind of Maskirovka — the Russian way of war by deception — as Russia is. It can very easily say one thing, and do another.
Let’s begin with a few simple facts. The Western world may have stopped — or be in the process of stopping — buying Russian oil. It may have launched a crackdown on Russian disinformation — even if that should go much further. Western businesses may have pulled out of China, at risk of reputational damage and punishment from their own governments.
China has done none of that. It hasn’t stopped buying Russian resources. It hasn’t stopped its own businesses exporting to Russia. Instead of cracking down on Russian disinformation, its state media, which is more or less its only media, is amplifying Russian Maskirovka — puppeting the line that there were bio weapons labs in Ukraine, which of course is a classic Russian ploy to use chemical or biological weapons in “retaliation.”
Those are warning signs. Yes, China is saying the right thing. Wouldn’t you? But it is doing another.
That is why the US is alarmed. It’s not just that China is reportedly sending — or at least has been asked to send — financial and military aid to Russia. It’s that China is not taking the line or side that the West wants it to. It shows no interest in cracking down on Russia whatsoever — financially, socially, culturally, economically, politically. Quite the opposite is the case on the ground, in terms of actions. Socially, culturally, economically, politically, financially — China is backing Russia.
That backing isn’t open in the sense that they are an Axis, like during World War II. But it is very real — money still flows, China amplifies Russian disinfo to its own people, calls this a war of Western aggression internally, buys copious amounts of Russian resources, from oil to gas to steel and so forth. China and Russia are coupled — and because they are coupled socioeconomically, China is still effectively backing Russia. It hasn’t obeyed the West’s demands or approach to turn Russia into a pariah state, cut off from the world.
In other words, the situation is escalating. NATO and the West’s strategy is not working. The Western strategy is deterrence via containment. Its goal is to isolate Russia, financially, economically, socially, politically. And by doing that, to deter it, from escalating further.
But the strategy is not working — because China’s emerging involvement is an escalation. It is a profound and serious escalation of the worst kind — the involvement of another power, a nuclear armed one. That is a worse escalation than, say, Russia using a hundred more tanks. Because the risks of world war rise very, very significantly.
Whose side is China on? Not ours. That should be plain to see already. Like I warned, you might have to put your emotions to one side to really see this — but the facts couldn’t be plainer.
If you doubt me, listen to this reporting regarding comments from the Chinese Foreign Minister, Wang Yi. “No matter how precarious and challenging the international situation may be, the China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination for a new era will be advanced, said Wang, reiterating that China independently makes judgments and determines its position concerning the Ukraine issue on its own merits with an objective and impartial attitude.”
Or let’s look at Chinese state media, in an article titled “US Fails to Trap China Over Ukraine”: “No matter how much the US attempts to bluff public opinion or threaten potential sanctions [on China], it won’t have any impact on the core interests of China.” Or this opinion piece from s state media editorial board: “Washington’s intention to threaten Beijing is obvious. It is an old US diplomatic tactic to use disinformation and intimidation to secure a favorable position in negotiations. But China never buys it.”
The question then becomes this. Can we at least stop China from taking Russia’s side? Because if, for example, it does get militarily involved, even at the level of aid, sending arms, then the risks of world war just went sky high.
The American approach to this problem is — and I’m going to use a word Americans won’t like — is to try to bully China. Whatever China’s done, it’s not Russia — it didn’t invade Ukraine. America’s trying to pressure and influence China to back off.
But this approach is not likely to work.
Why not? America, right about now, is probably threatening China with what’s known as “secondary sanctions.” Secondary sanctions are a weird quasi-legal thing. They say that anybody who does business with anybody who’s sanctioned get sanctioned. You can see how messy that gets, because of course, sanctions are placed on your own citizens. When America “sanctions” a country, it means that “American persons” can’t do business with said country, can’t buy or sell, trade, and so on. That’s because of course one country has no legal powers in another. But secondary sanctions aren’t going to work in this case — and they’re going to make America look, to the rest of the world, weak.
Why is that?
Think about how many goods the average American buys that are made in China. Think of how many you bought just this week. More or less anything you ordered from Amazon fits that bill. Bought at Best Buy or Walmart or what have you. What does that tell you?
If we sanction China, as in secondary sanctions — you do business with Russia, we stop doing business with you — the American economy will go into freefall. Literally everything that Americans buy and need and use on a daily basis — from clothes to bedsheets to sneakers to electronics is, wait for it, Made in China. How long you do think Americans can really go without that stuff? The stuff of everyday life? The West?
And that stuff costs real money. Remember, we in the West owe China huge amounts of money. Sure, we can “default” on that debt — but only at the cost of creating havoc and crisis in our own financial systems. Don’t kid yourself that the West can seriously just stop importing Chinese goods overnight — that would be economically catastrophic — or stop paying for the ones it owes money for, which would be financially catastrophic, and make 2008 look like a walk in the park, rich countries all defaulting on debt at once.
This is the part where you will need to put emotions to one side. It’s easy to reach for bravado in times of war. “I don’t need that stuff!! I can live without it forever!!,” you might say, proudly. But we’re talking about social level effects. And at a social level, it’s all but guaranteed that a society cannot just simply go without the stuff of daily life. It’s empty bravado to imagine that it can. What happens in such a situation is that economies collapse, living standards plunge, and people tend to change their political attitudes, fast.
It’s sentimental — dangerously sentimental — to imagine that suddenly Westerners and especially Americans are going to be willing to happily live without everything from iPhones to Macs to TVs to bedsheets to clothes. It’s not likely to happen, especially because the Western way of life is based around consumption, an addiction to consumption, courtesy of what? Cheap Chinese stuff — made of Russian resources, from oil to gas to the coal that keeps the lights in the factories on, to the wheat that feeds the workers.
Do you see my point a little bit? If you were the one who had to tell all of America or Britain that it was going to have to live without everything from electronics to clothes to sneakers to gadgets…would you take that job? None of us would. It’s an impossible one to do, which is precisely the point.
The unfortunate truth is that we have little to no leverage over China. America can pretend it does. America is going to use the same approach it uses on poorer, more powerless countries — threaten them with sanctions, which effectively just means locking them out of American trade, or even Western trade.
But we can’t really do that to China. China will just laugh and shrug — because it hurts the West a lot more than hurts it. China will be plunged back into poverty, sure — but it’s been there for quite a long time now. It’s the West which can’t deal with sudden destabilizations. It’s the West and American in particular which have far more to lose.
Western leverage over China is little to nothing. And China knows it. That is why, while it’s saying the right things, so as not to get in too much hot water right away, it’s happily doing business as usual with Russia. Are you beginning to see the scale and scope of the problem here?
Again, listen to Chinese state media: “Where does the US get its confidence from? Has it been dominating the world for so long that it thinks it even controls the lever of the Earth’s rotation? If Washington wants to forcibly tie China-US relations to the Russia-Ukraine crisis, it is on the wrong track and will definitely be disappointed.”
So let’s imagine if China does send military aid to Russia. We threaten it with sanctions. So what? Are we really going to stop ourselves trading with…China? How happy do you think the average Westerner is going to be when the shelves are empty? Good luck with that.
This approach is not going to work.
And the truth is that it’s our own fault. You see, so far I’ve written all this from a very Western perspective — how do try to force another country to do what we want? But a better question is: why is China taking Russia’s side?
Well, let’s think about the world from China’s perspective. We in the West brutalised it for centuries, invading it, blockading it, seizing its key territories, literally carving it up and making it part of our empires. China is a culture and civilization far, far older than our own. How do you think that makes it feel — to this day? Humiliated. If you doubt me, consider that the Chinese term for the Western imperialism of 1839–1949 is literally the “Century of Humiliation.”
What did we do next? Well, we offered China the same deal we do to the rest of the world. We exploit you. We pay you as little as humanly possible. Yesterday, you were our slave labour — today, OK, you can be one tiny step up from that. Are we paying you enough to have a democracy? Human rights? Functioning social systems? Even to eat? We don’t care about any of that. We just want to pay you as little as possible, and exploit you as hard as possible.
We’ve exploited China for decades now. It’s become the manufacturing centre of our Western world. But we have put no pressure on it to modernize. We never gave it enough money to really develop a democracy, because we wanted to pay it as little as possible. People never really grew rich enough — like Koreans did — to demand a functioning democracy. They stayed effectively one step up from slave labor, living in dormitories, not enjoying any human rights, overworked and underpaid, and so of course democracy and modernization was the last thing they could really focus on or care about, since they were just trying to survive.
This was a big, big mistake. It was our mistake. We designed this global economy. We are the ones in the West who invented all these institutions — like the WTO, which was made a few decades ago, and became our manufacturing hub, the financial systems which pay it, the economies which demand its goods. We designed this global economy — and we designed it to exploit nations like China.
Out of all the nations of the world, do you know there’s only one that’s ever really joined us in the league of rich nations in the modern era? Just one. South Korea. That is how abusive and unfair the global economy we’ve designed is. Westerners may think that the economy the West designed is fair, but that’s far from the truth. When only one poor nation has ever grown rich, something is very, very wrong with a global economy. It is still — it must be — based around principles of exploitation.
So what would you think of us if you were China? Here’s a sector of the world that brutalised it, carved it up, colonised it. And now exploits it as savagely as it still can. It calls all that fair and just and noble. And yet you’re the older culture, the one who’s been around longer, sophisticated and rich in art, literature, philosophy, medicine.
You would pretty much hate us too.
We never gave China a reason to be on our side. And now it isn’t. I’m not pointing fingers. I want you to see what a tremendous and terrible mistake all this was.
Our Western values are — or should be — freedom and justice and equality and truth and democracy, remember? So why is that we designed a global economy that didn’t care about those things at all? Which was happy to exploit nations like China — instead of really giving them enough to modernize, paying them like equals, helping them be free in real ways, letting them have the economic resources necessary to blossom into democracy? After all, poor countries do not usually become democracies, or stay so for very long. You need to attain a certain level of income to democratize. China has never had it. It’s still a relatively poor country, its average income just $10K. No wonder it never became a modern democracy.
We never let it be. We never lived up to our values.
That is a great, great tragedy, in my eyes. You see, we in the West have sowed the seeds of what is now a brewing world war. We exploited a nation like China — which is the wealthiest and largest Asian nation. Did nobody stop and think — maybe this is a bad idea? Maybe we shouldn’t be so exploitative and ruthless? We could have given it a fair deal, after all. Lord knows we have the money, the resources, the power. We could have, when welcoming China into the WTO, enforced terms of trade that came with human rights, which created the preconditions for democratisation and modernization. But we didn’t — we just focused on exploiting it.
So what happened was predictable, sad, and obvious. China never became a democracy. It stayed a politically stunted nation — growing into an autocracy. It never really modernised, in the sense of becoming an open society with free speech and free association and expression and so forth. It never joined us in the league of modern rich nations — because we didn’t allow it to. We didn’t want it to.
Hence, of course, today, China has no special sympathy for us. It doesn’t love us, like too many Westerners are taught to think. Just because China’s ultra rich class enjoys shopping trips buying luxury goods in the West, that doesn’t mean China even likes us. It just means its elite class aspires to show us how much richer they are. China, politically, culturally, socially? It thinks of us as selfish, greedy, calculating, ruthless barbarians. That is exactly the way we have treated it.
We never gave it a reason to be on our side, by living up to our own values of democracy and freedom and equality. And so now it isn’t.
What could change that?
Well, if you’ve followed me so far, not trying to bully it. China won’t just not respond to bullying, it will laugh at us in contempt. It expects that from us, because of the way we’ve treated it for centuries. It expects that. And it’s ready for that, having built up its own war chest. We owe China, remember.
What we could do, probably, is offer China the one thing it doesn’t expect, because it’s never had from us. A fairer deal. We could offer to not treat it like like glorified slave labour. We could say “we really want you to be part of our world now,” and invite it to our councils and meetings and summits. We could discuss how to lift its living standards by paying it more fairly when we trade with it — in exchange for real modernization and democratisation. We could treat it as an equal.
China would respond to that. Because it is the one thing that it has never had from us. A sense of real friendship. A sense that we care about it as anything more than a lesser nation of subhumans, who matter nothing to us except as slaves yesterday, and one step up from that today. We could do all kinds of interesting and creative things, like really invite it to be part of our world, sponsoring students, creating visa free travel, engaging with it as a nation, not just an economic commodity, investing with it in clean energy, working with it to defeat the pandemic.
Again, put aside your emotions. This isn’t a plea I’m making. These conclusions drawn from objective facts. The truth is that Westerners still see nations outside the West in lesser ways. That’s OK — we’re just discussing reality. But that has to change. Because all we do is alienate them. And we cannot merely exist as “the West” anymore, cosseted in a little bubble all our own. We need to be a world.
Whose side is China really on? Its own. It wants to survive us — as a civilization and culture. For that, it can hardly be blamed. The question is how we heal this rift between us, which has gone on far, far too long.
Yes, we can and should cut our dependence on Chinese goods. But that does not mean we can treat China or other nations the way that we’ve done. It only comes back to harm us. And the truth is that we can’t be a West that’s walled off from the world, either. What good is that? Doesn’t it make a mockery of us?
Our values didn’t stop at the West, did they? The point of freedom, equality, justice, truth, democracy — what was it? It wasn’t just for some. It was for all. We let ourselves down, my friends. When we became the West that gave up on these values for the world, we built a global political economy based on blood money, dirty oil, glorified slave labour, and billionaires plus oligarchs capturing the rents of it all. It wasn’t a place where democracy flourished. And without democracy, there is little peace. War returns, in the end, to haunt nations.
I wonder if we’re learning all that from all this yet. It is time to transform the global political economy — the one we built — in serious and real ways. Ways aligned with the values we claim to have. At last. The longer we wait to do it, the closer we’ll come to the edge of world war — and step beyond into it.